Do you fear death?
No, I don't. Not at all. I look forward
to it. I don't look forward to the act
of dying, but I look forward to what's
on the other side. And I'll mention in
this context that my partner, my partner
of 25 years, Christina Hardy, she died
last spring. She was a psychonaut like
myself. She had had many deep
experiences. She had no fear of death.
And the two of us have no fear of death
because she had gone to where she would
be going when she died. She had personal
familiarity with it and she knew that it
was a place of great blessing, great
beauty, great joy. When you understand I
mean and I don't mean just
intellectually but understand and have
had deep communion with these deeper
levels of reality that on the other side
of time space reality
then approaching death is not a durge of
sadness or mourning or just grief and
loss but rather it becomes a celebration
of a life well-lived. Christina had
lived her life very well. She had risen
to the challenges of her life and her
last years with me were some of the best
years of our marriage as we as we move
towards her death. Uh and I expect that
to be true for me too. I don't have any
fear of death and uh in fact I just have
to be patient
because for me uh I my belief is my
understanding is that at the very least
when I die I'll be able to go back to
some of the deepest places in the
universe that I had access through my
psychedelic work because I know the
address. As Robert Monroe would say, you
can go anywhere where you know the
address and I know the address of these
places. And if I can go back to there,
then I know I'll be able to go on even
deeper from there. So, no, I have no
fear of death at all.
[music]
Okay, Chris, welcome to the show. Now
between 1979 and 1999,
shortly after starting your career as a
university professor, you decided to
take LSD 73 times in a carefully planned
therapeutically structured sessions. I'm
just, you know, I have to start the
conversation by asking, you know, why
and and what motivated this? This is a
very this is a a very unique uh
experiment to to put yourself through.
So can you maybe just share share a bit
about that? Yeah. Well, I had just
finished graduate school at
[clears throat] Brown University. I was
a philosopher of religion. I was
starting my teaching career.
And in the first year, I met Ian
Stevenson's work on reincarnation. That
was a a major pivot in my thinking. But
more importantly, I met Stan Gra's work.
I read realms of the human unconscious,
which had just been published a couple
of years before. And I immediately saw
the importance of Stan's work. not just
for psychology and clinical therapeutic
work, but also for my field, philosophy
of religion. If what Stan was saying was
true, then this was a methodology that
would allow us to actually push the
boundaries of consciousness
systematically and glean philosophical
insights into the structure of at least
consciousness and probably reality, the
the actual reality that consciousness is
perceiving.
So I knew this work had to be done
personally. it couldn't be done well
from secondhand accounts. So I began
this work and I didn't expect it to last
20 years when I did it but that's what
happened. I worked for four years. I
stopped for six years and then I worked
for another 10 years very intensely.
Uh and I chose to work in with high
doses of LSD. Stan outlined in his early
writings two protocols that they had
used. One was lowdosese psycholytic
therapy, peeling the psyche away
gradually, layer by layer. Because of
the time constraints of a dual career
marriage and the difficulty of being
able to plan a weekend for this entire
session with children soon to come. I
chose to work with high doses of LSD in
a psychedelic protocol and I worked at
500 to 600 micrograms. And this is a
regimen that I don't recommend today. I
I'd do it differently if I were starting
over again. Uh but basically I thought
that I could consume my karmic baggage
if I just took bigger bites out of it
working at these high doses. It turned
out that I was applying a model
u of psychology and a model of the human
psyche that was wrong. Uh and so because
within two years I was being drawn into
experiences that were so deep and so
broad involving so many thousands of
human beings that I began to realize
that my entire model of personal
transformation, personal enlightenment
was too narrow uh to to do justice to
the states that actually unfold in these
states. So for me it was a professional
and personal journey seeking to
understand the deep structure of
reality.
And what was it that caused that shift
from the personal to the collective?
Well, [clears throat]
after about two years in the work, I
went through what Stan would have
described as a classic ego death uh
experience culminating after two years
of working at what he would call the the
perinatal level of consciousness,
deep death. And I expected at that point
for things to get easier. I expected to
go more easily into transpersonal
spaces. But what started immediately was
a new cycle that ended up lasting
another two years.
I have to back up one second. My work
always involved a cleansing portion of
the session and an ecstatic portion of
the session. So there was a purification
cleansing portion which if you navigated
it well would usually come to a
crescendo, some type of death and and
release and then the rest of the session
was in an ecstatic state.
So in this second stage of the work
after ego death
I began to have experiences of profound
human suffering covering vast numbers of
people and a vast number of years and I
was taken into it gradually but
systematically every session was getting
deeper and wider and deeper and wider
with more and more suffering.
And eventually I I had to realize that
this was larger than anything that could
be related to me personally. This wasn't
some former life uh experiences. It
wasn't simply u I wasn't drawing into my
personal therapy content from the
collective psyche that reinforced my
personal ego death because I really had
gone through a very decisive ego death
already. And that forced me, and this is
the main theme of my book, Dark Knight,
Early Dawn, was to recognize that there
is no strong boundary between the
individual and the collective psyche.
And when you work with highly energized
states, as I was in using high doses of
LSD,
then if you work with high energy
states, those energy states naturally
expand to who vast
landscapes of the collective psyche and
literally the patient in those sessions
becomes not just you personally. the
patient becomes some aspect of the
collective psyche. That something was
using my sessions to bring about some
catharsis in some small portion of the
collective psyche in order to drain the
trauma that still resides within the
psyche from human history. All the wars
that we've been through, all the
droughts, all the pain and suffering,
all the violence to each other, anything
which is not resolved, by the time the
individuals who experience it die, that
pain
uh congeals in the collective psyche and
becomes a burden to the collective
psyche's healthy functioning.
So that's the that's the the theory that
I presented in Dark Knight Early Dawn.
And what role do you feel healing
individual suffering may may play in the
bigger picture of the cosmos do you
think?
>> Yeah. Well, I think all of us
essentially are cells within the macro
intelligence, the macro consciousness of
our species. And so any time one
individual
comes to a healing goes through a
healing process and engages some aspect
of their personal shadow personal
history. I think that sets in motion uh
a healing that radiates around the
person 360 degrees. So we are all
fractally embedded in this larger
collective mind, this collective psyche.
So that when we work intensely
uh that healing doesn't just stay within
our personal boundaries, but it
naturally radiates out and touches the
healing of the entire species to some
degree. And so if you actually work and
you're experiencing collective suffering
and collective healing, that's just
taking it one step further. But anytime
one of us
addresses, confronts and heals personal
trauma, then that has a positive
uplifting effect on the collective
psyche as a whole.
>> It makes a lot of sense. And something
else I was curious to ask, you know, is
like you had to do this at a time when
psychedelics were were illegal. So very
much in the dark. What was it like to
sort of go between these two worlds on a
regular basis where you are you know
engaging with a sublime and then coming
back to the mundane? What's what's that
like as a person?
>> Yeah. Well, there are two aspects. Uh,
one of them is engaging as you say the
sublime and coming back to the mundane.
But the other aspect was uh being a
university professor teaching and doing
the things professors do but not being
able to talk about my work to my
colleagues or my uh students never my
students some of my colleagues knew what
I was doing and we talked um but not at
great depth because you know for people
who don't have deep experience with
psychedelics they simply can't
understand they can't follow what
happens when you take a a deep journey
journey into that work.
So it was a secrecy. I mean I knew I had
to do this in secret in order to do it
because by 197879
this was illegal and I don't like
breaking the law but I felt that it was
more important for me to use these
substances which would one day I knew
become legal uh to do them in this
underground fashion.
uh I found in the beginning it was fine
but I found that the longer I did this
work the more burdensome this secrecy
became and I found that if you can't if
you create
a persona which doesn't reflect your
full integrity sets in motion pressures
within the psyche it's like you it
starts on the outside but then
eventually that that discrepancy between
who you really are and who you are
pretending to be or who you're being
socially, it begins to produce cracks
within the human psyche. And I found
that years down the road, it was
becoming increasingly difficult for me
to maintain that boundary between my
private non-csychedelic life and my
personal psychedelic life. And I when I
say it's became more difficult, it means
uh I'm a teacher. Students would ask me
questions
which I could tell was very important to
them. But I could only answer them
deeply adequately if I were drawing upon
my psychedelic experience which was not
which I was not allowed to do. And as a
teacher the desire to share knowledge
and to teach
that created a tension with me because I
had knowledge I was not allowed to
share. The second part that you're
talking about is the challenge of going
into deep transcendent states and then
coming back to your ordinary mundane
condition and then going back again into
deep transcendent states and coming back
into your ordinary condition. I want to
say that I didn't have any difficulty
psychologically personally going out and
coming back. I seem to have a psyche.
Not everybody does, but my system seemed
to be comfortable losing its boundaries,
opening up into transcendental spaces,
and then coming back and congealing into
my mundane space.
And I would I made a serious effort to
recall and remember everything that
happened to me in those states. So I
would write my sessions up within 24
hours. I' I'd hold them, capture them. I
tried to live by the teachings that were
given to me. I tried to understand and
comprehend things that were not
comprehensible to me in the first
stages. But if you go back over and over
and over again, then they begin to make
more sense. You begin to be more
comfortable at these states.
But in the end I mean as I went into the
late stages of the work in the last five
years of the work I did find it
difficult to come back into ordinary
mundane reality because at that time I
was being drawn so deeply into the
divine
body of crystallin consciousness into
what I call diamond consciousness
so deeply into those realities
that uh it just became very very
difficult to come out of those states
and to come back into a state where I
could remember them and I could
understand them but I couldn't access
them again under my own power within my
own human resources that became a
burden. Uh and it I didn't realize how
much of a burden it would it became
until after I stopped my work. It was
after I stopped my work that I realized
that I really was kind of overextended
transcendentally
and I had to make a conscious choice to
stay grounded in time and space in my
personal reality and integrate what I
had done rather than continue to go deep
diving into the universe.
>> Wow. Wow. And
was a conclusion that you took from that
that
there was a there was a meaning to be
found, a purpose to be found for your
life in bringing the transcendent to the
everyday.
There was in several ways. First, again,
I'm not a therapist. I'm not trained as
a therapist and I I made the decision a
long ago to to not become a therapist
even even in the back in the underground
sense but to function as a solo explorer
to try to be willing to push my system
as far as I could to go out as deeply as
I could and to try to understand what I
was being shown uh in those conditions.
So that satisfied a very deep
philosophical need to understand and as
I have come to understand my past lives.
I've done several years of past life
therapy. I've uncovered a dozen or so of
my former lives.
And I began to understand that some of
the experiences and some of the lack of
understanding of how reality functions
was transferred into this incarnation.
and and seeding my deep desire to
understand how the world works. Why is
there so much suffering? How can a
benign and supremely intelligent
source manifest a universe that is so
painful and so difficult? What's going
on here? Why is it this way? Uh have we
done something wrong? Uh why is it this
difficult? And now I think I have an
understanding of that. And that that was
a primary drive to understand. And then
the second drive is to share that
understanding. But I wasn't really and I
did share that understanding indirectly
in the courses that I was teaching at
the university. Courses in world
religions, Eastern religions, Buddhism,
comparative mysticism.
But I wasn't able to share them directly
as coming from these psychedelic
visions. until after I retired and after
I began to write completely
uninhibitedly which I did in u LSD in
the mind of the universe. And when I
began to do that and began to follow
that into the world, this split that I
had created in myself between the
professor part and the psychedelic part
began to heal and it began to be merged
until finally I can be my full and
complete self in all circumstance.
>> And what was that like whenever you were
able to sort of let your mind off a
leash and just actually write about
these topics that had been swirling
around up there for for decades?
Well,
it was healing. At first, it was a
little scary. I mean, it literally after
I retired, it took me three years to get
myself in a psychological space where I
was willing to share this information
because I I knew my colleagues would not
be able to understand it or take it in.
I knew I was writing for the next
generation, younger people who would be
coming along. But even so, to share your
deepest, most intimate spiritual
experiences with the world, you know,
that's like sharing your sex life. And
it's very, very private. And it took me
a while to be willing to let people that
deeply into my life because I'm a
private person by nature. And eventually
I came to this position of being willing
to let people in by really by
understanding that these experiences
were not given to me for myself. They
were given to me to pass along to others
to support them in their spiritual
journey in their explorations in life.
And so I I surrendered personal
attachment to the story and then began
the process of telling the story. It
took me five years to write LSD in the
mind of the universe. And the last
chapter which is about coming down the
mountain when I what happened after I
stopped my sessions was the longest
chapter to write. It took me an entire
year just to write that one chapter
because I really I really had to process
everything that had happened to me in
the 20 years after I had stopped my
sessions.
So once I did this, once I went through
this process, once I told the story,
um it felt good. It felt good to come
out of the closet because being in a
psychedelic closet is just as damaging
as being in any other closet where you
have to deny something that's important
to you.
For sure. For sure. And
for in your
a few things come to mind here, but for
me
any time in my life when I've turned
towards suffering and engage with
suffering and seek to alleviate it, the
experience is always meaningful. It
always touches something deep inside
that
I wouldn't say it feels good, but it
feels right. it feels whole, you know,
and I was wondering, you did mention
there about, you know, you've you've a
really you got the answers you were
looking for with regards to suffering.
Would you be able to just to comment on
that and expand on that a little and
share your thoughts here?
>> Well, first just an observation on the
process.
Um
when you are confronted with suffering
in psychedelic space as in
psychotherrapeutic space uh it's
challenging it's difficult it's
difficult to let that much suffering in
but as you say it may not be fun it may
not be pleasant but it feels like the
right thing to do and when you embrace
your personal shadow suffering there
comes a point where eventually once You
integrate it all and you you see what
the source is and you confront it and
you live with it. There's a certain
falling away. You know, the pain falls
away and there is a freedom which
unfolds in its wake. And I found that to
be true also for all the forms of
suffering that surfaced on this journey.
Even when I was going through that
terrible collective suffering, the hell
the hell realms you might say, and I
felt that there was a meaning to this
work, even though it wasn't personal
meaning, it was personal in the sense
that it felt like this is something that
I was meant to do. And as I learned
later down the road, that was true. that
that uh as I began to understand and was
shown my purpose for this incarnation, a
very significant part of it was this
actual process of facilitating
collective healing.
When I
went into this pain and allowed it to
run through me deeper and deeper,
eventually after two years,
uh, it culminated in a in a crescendo of
of pain and then it sort of spun me out
into deep transpersonal places. It's to
when it spun me out beyond the entire
human psyche into archetypal reality.
And there were still episodes of of
suffering remaining because
what I found is that death and rebirth
is a cycle. You know, it just it goes
round and round.
And you don't die once when you simp
when you die at the egoic level that
gives you access to a certain level of
transpersonal consciousness.
But if you keep pushing, then eventually
you're going to come to a threshold and
you'll have to go through another round
of dying, another round of suffering in
order to gain access to the next level
of consciousness. And if you're
systematically systematic and you work
at that level, eventually the same thing
will happen. You'll go through yet
another round of death and rebirth and
that'll take you into yet another level
of consciousness where the rules of
physics are different. the rules are
just different. It's a different realm.
I found that
uh
I learned to trust that process to trust
the process that welcoming anything that
happens no matter whether you understand
it or not embracing the suffering that
happens always worked to my betterment.
It worked to the betterment of beings
that I I'll never meet. Uh but it also
worked to my personal measurement
because it allowed me to experience
things that were important to me that
became important to me. Uh that kind of
onlogical intimacy with the creative
principle of existence was really
important.
How is your inner experience of life now
different
after you've did this work compared to
before? I know it's very difficult to
put your own your own perceptions into
into words, but is there anything you
could share there about what life is
like for you on the inside after having
been through such such incredible
experiences?
>> Well, I don't consider myself an
enlightened being. Uh so, let's just get
that out of the way. I don't live in
that kind of space. I think if I were
seeking enlightenment in this work, I
would have done it very differently. I
would have done much lower doses. You
know, enlightenment as I understand it
is a condition of transparency
to the ground of reality which is always
present, never changing, always there,
living in communion, daily communion,
minuteby minute with this reality.
And while I I certainly touched things
like that, my work really was different.
It wasn't therapeutic healing and it
wasn't aimed primarily at spiritual
awakening.
I began to understand that it was aimed
at cosmological exploration. I was
trying to seek and understand larger and
larger pictures of how the universe
works.
Uh so the end result once you do that is
It leaves you with a certain porocity
but not the same type of paracity that
is enlightenment classically said. It
has left me um calmer, more at peace. I
understand reality more than I did
before, more deeply. I understand
reincarnation more deeply. I have a an
understanding of the cosmic processes
that are involved in human evolution.
where evolution is taking humanity,
where reincarnation is taking humanity,
there is a certain step back and
enjoying
the magnificent splendor of the universe
around us and also understanding with
empathy, with compassion, the suffering
that people go through uh so much. And
I have a certain understanding of how
that plays out in a larger evolutionary
horizon.
So there there is a a contentment.
There's a certainly a deepened
compassion
uh
an understanding
a relaxation
uh and a desire to be of use just to be
just to be helpful uh just to be of as
much use to other people as I can in the
time that's left to me.
That sounds pretty good. Um, do you fear
death?
>> No, I don't. Not at all. I look forward
to it. I don't look forward to the act
of dying, but I look forward to what's
on the other side. And I'll mention in
this context that my partner, my partner
of 25 years, Christina Hardy, she died
last spring. She was a psychonaut like
myself. She had had many deep
experiences. She had no fear of death.
And the two of us have no fear of death
because she had gone to where she would
be going when she died. She had personal
familiarity with it and she knew that it
was a place of great blessing, great
beauty, great joy. And when you when you
understand I mean and I don't mean just
intellectually but understand and had
deep communion with these deeper levels
of reality that on the other side of
time space reality
then approaching death
is not a durge of sadness or mourning or
just grief and loss but rather it
becomes a celebration of a life
well-lived. lived. Christina had lived
her life very well. She had risen to the
challenges of her life and her last
years with me were some of the best
years of our marriage as we as we move
towards her death. Uh and I expect that
to be true for me too. I don't have any
fear of death and uh in fact I just have
to be patient
because for me uh I my belief is my
understanding is that at the very least
when I die I'll be able to go back to
some of the deepest places in the
universe that I had access through my
psychedelic work because I know the
address. As Robert Monroe would say, you
can go anywhere where you know the
address and I know the address of these
places. And if I can go back to there,
then I know I'll be able to go on even
deeper from there. So, no, I have no
fear of death at all.
>> Wow. Wow. Okay. Um, yeah, I've heard you
describe death almost as a as a
homecoming, and that that's a really
interesting way to put it. Um can you
maybe tell us about the work of of
Michael Newton and [clears throat] to
what extent do you believe that
we before coming here we consciously
chose
a particular life a particular let's say
cohort a family
people to come here with what do you
think what do you make of that idea
>> well [clears throat] I have found that
to be true in my experience as I've come
to know the deeper cause and effect
patterns of my life. Uh you know my
first book life cycles was on
reincarnation
in which I tried to integrate the best
available evidence for reincarnation
that was available at the time. I did
not know Michael Newton's work at that
time. His came a little bit later. Uh I
like Michael Newton's work a lot. I
respect his work a great deal. Uh it
rings true to me. It rings true to my
own experience of the Bardau in
psychedelic states. It rings true to
what I understand from the mystical
traditions of the world, particularly
Buddhism, and their description of what
happens to an individual when they die.
His is more detailed. Um another person
that I would mention if you want to
understand the deep structure of the
cycle going into the spiritual reality
coming back to time and space into the
circle is uh Robert Monroe. uh he wrote
three important journey uh books on the
out-of- body state, his experiences out
of body and in his book far journeys and
the ultimate journey two books far
journeys and the ultimate journey he
gives a comprehensive description of
what happens to us when we die and I
find it very congruent with u Michael
Newton's description.
Now on the choosing of our incarnation,
I'm an educator. So let me bring an an
educator's uh metaphor to it. When
children uh are starting their studies,
we don't give kindergartens and earners
and first graders much of a choice in
what they study. We say study this. But
as you go into high school, you have
more choices, more freedom to choose. As
you go into college and graduate school,
you have a lot more freedom to choose
what you're going to study. And I think
it's something like that for the soul
too. It may be the case that in the
early stages you basically things are
arranged for you and you go uh where
you're told by people who understand
more than you do. But as you grow and as
you learn, I think you have more freedom
and more uh freedom to choose. So that
by the time you have enough cycles of
reincarnation under your belt and I
think most of us do by now I agree with
Michael Newton that we uh we choose the
life we are incarnating into the people
we are incarnating with. It's a group
choice. The themes of the life. Now,
Michael Newton says there is um a place
that you go when you are consulting with
your spiritual guides where you are
given an experiential taste of the lives
that they are recommending to you that
you could choose. You can't see the end
of it because it's not the end is not
written. you can get a sense of the
beginning and you choose whether you
want any of these lives. You don't have
to take these lives. You could go
completely
um on your own recog recognizance and
try to go it on your own. But most
people are wise to take a choice from
among the choices that are given to
them. So my position is that uh pretty
much today
there are no uh that everybody is a is a
volunteer. Everybody knows what they
were getting into there. We understand a
much deeper understanding of history and
an able ability to see more into the
future when you were in spiritual
reality than when you were in physical
reality. So my assumption is that we all
knew what we were getting into. We all
knew about this particular period of
history and the intensity and uh and the
opportunities in this period of history.
We chose together who we would be with
uh and our former life companions and
and then we jump in and uh then we do
our best and then we die and we return
home and then we begin then we remember
the larger context of our choosing and
the larger context of our life and we
see how we did which things we handled
well which things we handled not well.
We fold this learning forward and then
after a period of study and and
recreation and and restoration,
eventually the time comes where we make
another choice to incarnate again.
A few things come to mind. You know, if
that's the paradigm that we hold, it
seems that we can be a lot more patient
with ourselves in this lifetime. And
that doesn't mean complacent,
but just realize, you know, you're here
to learn a specific set of lessons or
experience a certain set of things and
to maybe let that process unfold maybe
more more organically and more
naturally.
>> Yeah, I think so. patient with ourselves
and also compassionate with everyone
else that we see because and this was
one of the great liberating things when
I first shifted to thinking in terms of
reincarnation because in western
religions there's so much of a pressure
like everyone you got to cross the
finish line before you die otherwise you
you go to hell or something doesn't work
well for you but once you understand
reincarnation you realize not
everybody's in the same class not
everybody's trying to learn the same
things. People are at different stages
of a long evolutionary journey and uh it
just gives you more patience and
compassion for people who are at very
very different stages of their journey
than you are. Some of them are more
advanced and working on more advanced
themes. Some of them are less advanced.
So it sort of suspends judgment. It just
it it judgment is not wise. It just
traps you in your preconceptions.
Patience and compassion. Yeah.
>> Yeah. Something I heard you say which I
really liked is that older older
learners help younger learners. And just
because someone is a child doesn't mean
they're they have a a child soul so to
speak and someone someone an older
person might have a a a child soul. So
>> it yeah it's an interesting way to look
at humanity you know.
>> Yeah. I don't when I look at people I
don't see people so much anymore. I try
to tune into souls and souls are not
necessarily the same age of the body
that's holding them. Uh just as you say
there can be old souls and young bodies,
young souls and old bodies. And [snorts]
this is what Michael Newton says in
terms of the structure of postmortem
existence. Older learners help younger
learners. The whole system is set up so
that older learn learners can help
younger learners throughout the process.
>> I really like that.
>> Me too.
>> A person you mentioned earlier as well
is the work of Ian Stevenson. Um is
there anything you feel would be
particularly important to highlight
about the research that he's done?
Anything that you know might surprise
people what what what he's discovered in
his work?
Well, I I think of Ian Stevenson as a
Charles Darwin of reincarnation. He has
provided I mean, reincarnation is an old
idea. It goes back several thousand
years, but he has provided empirical
evidence that documents the the
continuity of memory, continuity of
consciousness across lifetimes. He his
last great work uh on reincarnation in
biology. He not only documents
continuity of memory, but he also
documents continuity of death trauma
manifesting in the bodies of the next
incarnation. So that somebody who is
shot will and he has medical records or
someone who has been hung
sometimes in their next incarnation they
have birth marks are are seeming scars
on their tissue that relate to the
trauma of the previous incarnation. See,
I just think Stephvenson's work uh and
many volumes of his work and this work
is continuing by Jim Tucker at
University of Virginia really provides
ample empirical
justification, empirical evidence to
justify the conclusion that
reincarnation is not a matter of faith.
It's not a matter it's just it's just a
matter of empirical fact. It's something
that nature has learned how to do just
and it it's a matter of collecting
intelligence and rolling intelligence
forward. Just as evolution rolls
intelligence forward for whole species,
at some point nature has found a way to
roll learning forward
uh in individuals within certain
species. So I think of reincarnation as
a higher octave of evolution. It's the
same impulse, the same developmental
capacity, but now focused on
consciousness and focused uh on
individuals.
Just to underline how shocking it is
what we're talking about here is am I
right in saying that he would have
interviewed say children that would
claim to have memories of a past life
and then one of these kids might have
had say had a birth mark in a specific
spot in their body and then he would
then trace details of that past life and
find that the person might have been
shot there or if it was on the neck
might have been hung there. Is that what
we're saying?
>> Yes, that's absolutely correct. the
work, his work focuses on studying young
children from around the world who have
spontaneous memories of their previous
life. Now, there's some idiosyncratic
characteristics of these children.
Too long to go into the whole story, but
basically they tend to reincarnate
faster and closer to the lifeplace of
the first personality than the
population at large. There are certain
larger studies looking at the population
at large, but these children who have
verified memories of their previous life
tend to reincarnate within two and a
half years of the death of the previous
personality and within 50 miles of the
lifeplace of the previous personality.
So, they're coming in faster and closer
to their previous personality. most
people it's longer
between lives and it's more distant
between lives. So there is sort of an
unusual subset uh of but they're
cumulatively very very strong evidence.
It's just very hard to explain how these
children can know what they know
by any kind of ordinary conventional
transmission of information
or even supersai. It's just
the most logical and simplest and
powerful explanation is rebirth.
>> Wow. Wow. Okay. [gasps] Um, can you tell
us about this sort of
up and out sort of philosophy that many
many religions and wisdom traditions
hold versus
I've heard you say speak about the
importance of maybe maybe it's more
about bringing your life to fruition.
Can you just tell us about this contra
contrast?
Well, I think in general and this is a
broad generalizations and there are some
exceptions for especially
spiritual uh teachers within these
traditions but basically the religions
of the axial age of of basically the
last 5,000 years have tended to be adopt
what I would call an upand-out
cosmology. That is the goal is to
achieve salvation or to achieve
enlightenment and when and then when you
die to leave the entire space-time
system. Uh so that in Hinduism
reincarnation is called moka which means
escape. Escape not only from your
personality but escape from samsara the
cycle of rebirth. And this tendency
tends to run throughout the popular
versions of the religions that the goal
is not to to stay on earth, but the goal
is to go back to our spiritual home to
get there and to stay there. So your
work results in a transformation of your
person and the reward is some off-planet
paradise whether it's pure land or the
garden in Islam or heaven for Christians
and so on so forth
and I think this leaves a fundamental
question unanswered
and the question is what is the purpose
of spacetime in the beginning? Why is
spacetime here? Is it something that
we're simply supposed to escape from? Is
it a trial and tribulation? It is
something that we've inherited because
of a cosmic fall, the original sin. Um,
and I think that might have made sense
in the early centuries when we were
still thinking the universe was
relatively young, 6,000, 10,000 years
old. But now that we understand how
first how old the universe is on this
iteration 13.7.8
billion years and we don't know how many
other explosions and implosions there
have been and how vast the universe is.
And when we begin to really comprehend
the enormity of the scale of creation,
then it makes this idea that the goal is
to finally reach some clarity about your
def your self sense to understand to
reach that part of your consciousness
which is common ground with all living
beings so that what you are and what
they are is the same essence as the
Hindus would say atman equals Brahman.
As [snorts] soon as you reach that, as
soon as you mature enough through all
the years of evolution and 5,000 years
of writing and meditation, as soon as
you reach that, then your goal is to get
out the entire assembly line of time and
space. And I think that's that to
realize our transcendental nature, to
realize these deep and profound truths
only takes us halfway in the creative
intent. It's not simply to achieve
escape velocity and to go into the
spiritual bliss, but it's also to bring
that spiritual bliss and to bring the
power of divine creativity which is your
birthright, your nature at core to fully
actualize that inside time and space.
Now there are strains within the
religions uh which recognize that and
hold that. But I think for the populace
at large that's not a common way of
seeing it. But I think
I think we are going through a
transition where we're beginning to
understand that the goal is to achieve
enlightenment or achieve some type of
spiritual clarity, some spiritual
communion, depth of spiritual communion
and then take that into our life inside
time and space and literally bring
heaven to earth. uh to bring the
conditions of the radical joy and
freedom of heaven into our earthly lives
and to continue then to refine the human
experience here on this planet and
elsewhere.
>> Wow. Wow. Um I'm going to read read out
something I've heard you say elsewhere
that's that really grabbed me. Everybody
experiences the soul when they die, but
I think we're in the process of giving
birth to humanity who's experiencing the
soul fully when they're alive on Earth.
And
to what
what evidence evidence do you think we
have that there's something unique about
the time that we're living in where in
this particular century this new
consciousness might be
be being birthed into into the world?
Well, [clears throat]
I'm not going to answer that question as
an academic who has digested a lot of,
you know, sources of information. One
could I mean anthropologists can consult
uh indigenous cultures who have a
certain vision of history that this is a
particular time. We could look at Hindu
sources which talks about the kal luga
kalyuga which is a time of intense
purification which is immediately before
a time of cultural breakthrough and
spiritual breakthrough. I'd rather
answer this just on the basis of my own
psychedelic experience because I'm more
confident drawing on that.
And in my work
uh I went through a series of
experiences that that changed my
understanding of what the purpose of
reincarnation is and where reincarnation
is taking us. As I said, I have
knowledge of about a dozen of my former
lives. I did that during the six years
when I was off not doing the psychedelic
work. I did some past life therapy work.
So I had some familiarity with my deep
past. But in a particular session about
halfway through my journey, I had a a
very deep ex experience when I began to
my former lives began to come into me.
It was like ripe wrapping
a string around a kite spool. And I
these lives were just coming into me
very fast. And then they seemed to hit
critical mass and they fused.
And when they fused into one, I
experienced an explosion of diamond
light out of coming out of my chest. And
I was catapulted into a radical state of
consciousness beyond anything I had
known before in which I was an
individual.
I wasn't Chris Beige, but I was an
individual, but I was an individual
beyond any parameters I'd ever known
before.
And I think what I experienced is what I
call the diamond soul. And that is the
soul which is the complete integration
healthy
well integrated balanced integration of
all of one's former lives so that so
deeply that they fuse into a single
entity and this is what I mean of as the
soul or the diamond soul. Now I think if
things go well
uh when we die we return to our soul. So
we and then when we incarnate a part of
that energy incarnates as the individual
incarnation and when we die we return to
our soul and come back. Return to the
soul and come back. And so I think we do
experience the soul
more commonly in after our deaths and
before our incarnation.
But if we think of this pulsing taking
place over and over and over again over
thousands and hundreds of thousands of
years, I think it begins to sort of make
more sense that sooner or later in the
evolutionary journey, the process of
evolution itself is to foster a
maturational development
so that we grow into and ask our soul
on our on Earth in our incarnations that
we literally
live in a state of consciousness where
we're no longer tempted to identify as
just this body. We know that the
consciousness that this body carries is
older than this physical body and will
continue longer than this physical body.
And I think basically my and as it was
laid out for me in my sessions as the
story of humanity spiritual development
was unfolded in my sessions.
I think we're coming into a time where
the challenge is literally to grow up.
The challenge is to grow up
psychologically, spiritually and to
claim the deeper being that we are. And
Chris Beig is only one incarnation of
the of my soul. And the goal is to wake
up to the soul. Not only to establish
communion with it and to receive
guidance from it, but literally
eventually to incarnate the soul in your
physical incarnation.
I think this is where our entire species
is going. I think we're coming to a
crescendo in our spiritual journey. And
in this crescendo, there is a a
tremendous upgrowth coming underneath us
that's taking humanity into a
fundamental change of our psychological
condition. This is a change which is
affecting the substructure of the
psyche, the collective psyche. It's not
just an individual personal thing. It's
a collective thing. It's an evolutionary
pivot that we're making. I think we are
waking up spiritually and becoming what
I would call diamond souls on earth. Now
a lot of people have this intuition.
They've seen it. They've experienced it.
They use different names to they have
different words for it. They talk about
u homosspiritualis
or noetic homonoeticus
uh different nomenclature but I think
all of us are seeing the same thing a
shift in our baseline consciousness from
one level into a higher level a
permanent shift in consciousness so that
all human beings born after this shift
takes place will be born and operating
within a different collective psyche.
than our ancestors have been and I don't
think this is a shift which is going to
be quick uh going to happen you know
suddenly dramatically I think it's going
to take multiple generations for us to
make this transition and it will be
preceded by great purification just like
when an individual mystic before they
achieve mystical realization they go
through what some have called the dark
night of the soul
which is a time of profound cleansing,
purification, confronting one's personal
shadow, healing it, so on so forth. I
think we're going through now, we are
beginning the dark night of our
collective soul in which we are
confronting the sins of our fathers and
mothers. Our we are our fathers and
mothers. We're confronting the deep
historical
inadequacies,
um, unhelpful tendencies, harmful
tendencies, the things we've done in the
past, those are coming up very, very
strongly in the collective psyche.
We have to see this through to its full
conclusion so that we can cooperate with
the very powerful spiritual energies
that are increasing underneath us at
this time in history.
It seems like we've been running on
momentum from the past um hundreds and
hundreds and hundreds of years of
generations, iterations. And it's this
habit energy. And we're finally at a
time now as as individuals where we have
the capacity to to be a to be aware of
that conditioning, to be aware of of
those patterns and in some cases break
them. You know what a what a tremendous
responsibility to place on somebody. Um
but yeah an interesting time to be
alive. There's something else I wanted
to ask you earlier and I forgot but why
I have you just
um
>> I completely agree with you. It's a very
exciting time to be alive. Very powerful
time to be alive. Yeah.
>> Okay. They're not an easy question or a
light question to end on, but
wondering about
the problem of evil and specifically
let's say someone like a a Hitler or a
Stalin um in the afterlife after you
know a life like that ends. What do you
think might happen to someone like that?
Yeah,
I want to be careful
because um
I don't want to indulge in a speculative
answer. Uh and inevitably this involves
a certain measure of speculation.
Uh we can you're talking about kind of
human individuals
who are so
distorted
in their heart and in their mind that we
would call them bad or evil. And then
there's a second layer to your question.
Is there a cosmic principle of evil? Now
I don't personally I don't believe
there's a cosmic principle of evil but
there is a cosmic principle of inertia
and there is if there is in us something
which draws us to higher potentials and
deeper realization there is also a force
in nature which kind of pulls us down
into the lower side of our potential. I
don't think of that as evil.
Some might and okay if you want to call
it evil uh I would just call it the
regressive side of the tension of our
developmental capacity.
What happens to individuals who have
done so much damage to other individuals
who um in exalting themselves have have
hurt the lives of thousands of millions
of people.
Well, here I would turn to Michael
Newton. And Michael Newton in his book
Destiny of Souls, his first book was
Journey of the Soul or Journey of Souls.
Second book, Destiny of Souls, he
describes in more detail what happens to
individuals who have been who have given
themselves over to malice, injury, u
those type of things. And he says they
they require special handling because
they're they are so distant. They have
pulled away so far from their divine
center because when we are near the
divine center
we it's a place of deep and profound
compassion. It's the divine center is
the touchstone of oneness. With oneness
comes compassion becomes an
all-inclusiveness.
So someone who is pathological or
malevolent in history is very far away
from their divine center and therefore
require special handling
when they die in order to handle the
damage which they've done to themselves
and to the people around them. [snorts]
Now, one simple way of understanding
what happens to us when we die,
and I draw this from looking at
near-death episode literature, when
people experience a life review, when
people have the experience of their life
review, they not only experience every
second, every intention, every thought
of their entire life, but they
experience how those actions and how
those thoughts impacted those around
them. So someone who is in a fist fight
experiences how the other person
experienced being beaten up and what it
did to their psyche and where what
happened when they brought that anger
home. People who are in war who have
assassinated people experience in their
life review what that assassination did
to the history of the family that was
without a father from that point on. So
one way of thinking about this is if you
just take a big rock and throw it into a
lake and the ripples spread out, our
life is like that. We send ripples out
into the world.
What happens when we die is that all
those ripples come back to us and we
experience the full social impact of our
life. Be not to punish us and not even
to reward us but because fundamentally
at core life is one. And if you have
lived your life according to that value
and have tried to be good and careful
and kind and compassionate to people,
you send out this wave of goodness. it
comes back to you and you experience uh
the bliss what we would call heaven or
the bliss of of one's spiritual
well-being.
If you've done evil and harm and injury,
then that comes back to you as well. And
can you imagine what it would be like to
be Hitler and experience the pain that
you saw that you caused coming back to
you? And that's why beings like this
require special handling as they go
through this adjustment process.
He even goes so far to say that some
beings uh cannot be restored to an
operational
a healthy balance in their psyche. And
those beings are sometimes recycled in a
more radical way to
to an earlier stage of their soul's
spiritual evolution and begun again. So
it's complicated topic but you get the
basic idea.
>> Wow, that's a really really well
articulated uh point of view to a very
difficult question. So thank you for
that. Um Chris, it's been such a
pleasure speaking with you. Um really
really enjoyed this. Um for anybody that
wants to dive deeper into your work
after this, where would you send them um
to learn more?
>> Well, they could go to the website, my
website, chrisbash.com.
Um it's kind of old and not up todate,
but uh there's some information there.
You'll see my books there. Um,
I've done oh maybe 85 or so 90 podcast
and talks that are online. So it's not
hard to find me. If you just Google me
on YouTube,
you you'll find places where I've given
these types of discussions and talks.
There's a talk on the scientific
evidence for reincarnation that I gave
in Germany a few years back. They're
they're different talks but uh the most
important thing I think would be to jump
into my books have been four books life
cycles on reincarnation
uh dark night early dawn which is when I
first started writing on psychedelic uh
experiences then there's a book called
the living classroom
which describes how my secret work which
my students never knew about how it
began to impact them. So it's about the
distributed effect of one's spiritual
practices. And then lastly and maybe
most importantly LSD in the mind of the
universe.
>> Fantastic. Okay. Thank you so much Chris
and I wish you the best going forward.
>> Yeah. Very I enjoyed our conversation
very much. Thank you very much. It's
been an honor.
[music]
>> If you enjoyed this episode, you might
also enjoy getting our seven insights
newsletter. This is a once per month
email [music] where I share seven of the
most valuable insights I've uncovered in
the previous 30 days. It includes book,
podcast, and documentary
recommendations, [music]
as well as questions and quotes
specifically created to help you live a
more creative, intentional, and [music]
meaningful life. It currently goes out
to over 50,000 subscribers each month.
And if you're interested in joining
them, you can sign up via the link in
the description.